HARI SREENIVASAN: Now we visit
one of the most successful,
prolific women in America,
the creative force behind
the Barefoot Contessa
cookbooks and TV shows.
William Brangham recently
went to see Ina Garten at her
home on Long Island, New York,
and has this look at
her life and career.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Can
I have another bite?
INA GARTEN, Chef: You can
have as much as you like.
(LAUGHTER)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
This is the best job.
(LAUGHTER)
INA GARTEN: Isn't it?
This is what I get
to do for a living.
Isn't it unbelievable?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
It's fantastic.
Ina Garten is one of the
most famous and beloved
cooks in America today.
Better known as the
Barefoot Contessa, she
sits atop a culinary empire
built on her bestselling
cookbooks, with millions
of copies sold, a
string of hit TV shows.
INA GARTEN: Just because it's
a weeknight dinner doesn't
mean it has to be boring.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And a
legion of devoted fans.
INA GARTEN: This is my
little secret garden.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: We
visited Garten at her
home and headquarters
in East Hampton, New
York.
We talked in the huge
barn she had built next
to her House that's now
her office, test kitchen
and TV studio, all in one.
INA GARTEN: This is where
the show is shot, and this
is where we test recipes.
And every morning, I walk
across the lawn and I meet the
two people, Barbara and Lidey,
who work with me.
And we just go, OK, what
are we going to do today?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That's
the extent of your commute?
INA GARTEN: That's my commute.
(LAUGHTER)
INA GARTEN: It's like 100 yards,
I think, maybe less, maybe 50.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Pretty amazing.
INA GARTEN: It's pretty amazing.
I usually just put it
right in the middle.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Garten's
career began 40 years ago.
But, at first, she gave no
hint as to how she'd evolve.
In the 1970s, newly married to
husband Jeffrey, Garten was a
budget analyst in Washington,
D.C.,
INA GARTEN: I was
working at OMB, Office of
Management and Budget.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: For
the federal government?
INA GARTEN: Yes,
for Ford and Carter.
And I worked on
nuclear energy policy.
How's that for precedent
for the food business?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: It
makes no sense whatsoever.
(LAUGHTER)
INA GARTEN: I ran from it.
And by the late '70s, I thought,
I have been working here for
four years, and nothing has
happened.
And I just didn't feel like
I had any impact on anything.
And I hit 30, and I thought, I
want to do what I want to do.
And I thought, I want to
be in the food business.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: One day, she
saw an ad for a specialty food
store for sale in the Hamptons,
the exclusive beach
destination for New Yorkers.
INA GARTEN: I went home and
I told Jeffrey about it, and
he said, pick something you
love to do.
If you love doing it, you
will be really good at it.
And so I made her a very low
offer, the woman who was selling
it, thinking, well, we will
come back.
We will negotiate.
We drove back to Washington.
I was in my office the next
day and the phone rang.
And she said, thank
you very much.
I accept your offer.
And I just remember going,
oh (EXPLETIVE DELETED).
(LAUGHTER)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What
have I gotten myself into?
INA GARTEN: What have I done?
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
And that was it?
INA GARTEN: That was it.
Two months later, I was behind
the counter of a specialty
foods store, trying to figure
it out.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
store she bought was called
the Barefoot Contessa.
That was the nickname
of the prior owner.
It was 1978, and this
was Garten's very first
job in the food industry.
So, had you been a cook before?
INA GARTEN: No.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Not at all?
INA GARTEN: I'd never
worked in a store.
I never worked in a restaurant.
I mean, I cooked at
home, but that's not
really the same thing.
I taught myself how to cook
when I worked in Washington
using Julia Child's cookbooks.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And you have
had no training beyond that?
INA GARTEN: No.
No.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
That's amazing.
INA GARTEN: Thank you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The store was
a smash, and later moved to a
bigger location in East Hampton.
After 18 years, she sold
the store and tried her
hand at a new venture.
In 1999, the Barefoot Contessa
cookbook was published, and it
quickly became a bestseller.
Nine additional books have
followed, each a bestseller.
All contain her trademark
simple and accessible recipes.
INA GARTEN: I think that I
had a very clear vision when I
started writing cookbooks what
I wanted it to be, and that you
would open the book, that you
would look at the photograph
and go, that looks delicious.
And then you would look at the
recipe and say, I can actually
make that and I can make
it with ingredients I can
find in the grocery store.
I don't think that's
changed at all.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Having taught
yourself how to cook, does
that inform the recipes that
end up in your book, because
you're thinking of them not
from a professionally trained
mind, but someone who
did this on her own?
INA GARTEN: That's really smart.
Actually, when I first started
writing cookbooks, I remember
thinking to myself, what makes
me think I can write a cookbook?
There are these great chefs
who are really trained.
And, as I started, I realized,
actually, what is my lack is
actually exactly right, because
I can connect with --
cooking's hard for me.
I never worked on...
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Cooking is hard for you?
INA GARTEN: It is
so hard for me.
Anybody that works
with me will tell you.
It's so hard for me.
And that's why my recipes
are really simple, because I
want to be able to do them.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Soon,
executives at the Food Network
came calling, and calling, and
calling.
I understand you were reluctant
at first to do television?
INA GARTEN: Reluctant
is the understatement.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Really?
INA GARTEN: I just said no
over and over and over again.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Why?
INA GARTEN: I just didn't
think I'd be good on TV.
I just couldn't imagine
why anybody would watch it.
And Food Network,
fortunately, kept coming
back again and again.
And they said, just try it.
And I thought, well, I will
just do 13 shows, and then
they will leave me alone.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: And that
was how many shows later?
INA GARTEN: And, happily,
that was 15 years later.
(LAUGHTER)
INA GARTEN: I'm still doing it.
I'm going to show you my
recipes and my techniques.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
Barefoot Contessa series
is now 13 seasons' strong.
INA GARTEN: You too
can cook like a pro.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Her latest
version, "Cook Like a Pro,"
shows tips and techniques aimed
at helping viewers become more
comfortable in the kitchen.
INA GARTEN: Everything you
need to know, from trussing
the bird to carving it.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: What do
you know of your audience?
Who is watching it?
INA GARTEN: You know, there's
this moment in time when I
really got a vision of who
the audience was.
I was walking up Madison
Avenue, and there was a
woman in a big fur coat.
And she said, "Oh, darling,
love your cookbooks."
And I thought, that's very nice.
Then I kept going.
About a half-a-block later, a
truck driver pulled over and
said, "Hey, baby, love your
show."
(LAUGHTER)
INA GARTEN: And I
thought, that's food.
I think my cookbook audience
might be slightly different
from my TV audience, but I think
they're people that
are interested in food,
and that's everybody.
You're doing a beautiful
job, I have to tell you.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
You're just saying that.
(LAUGHTER)
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: During
our visit, Garten showed
us a few simple recipes.
You can see her demonstrate
them on our Web site.
Meanwhile, she says her days
are now spent testing new
recipes for her upcoming 11th
cookbook.
It's due in the
fall of next year.
INA GARTEN: I love
what I'm doing.
I'm really happy doing it, and
I hope I can do It forever.
And I'm having a ball.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Ina Garten,
so great to talk to you.
Thank you very much.
INA GARTEN: Well, it was so much
fun to talk to you too, William.
(LAUGHTER)
HARI SREENIVASAN: Online,
one "NewsHour" staffer
shares what Ina Garten
taught her about life,
love, and dijon vinaigrette.
That's at PBS.org/NewsHour.